# hello-world
Demo repository
Banks headquartered in oil-heavy states increased loan loss provisioning well above the national median in the 2015 fourth quarter. But since reserves are coming up from a low base, some analysts think banks will need to further increase provisioning to deal with the energy fallout.
In Texas, nearly 100,000 people are employed in oil and gas extraction, representing more than half the nationwide total. Banks in the state increased provisioning by 71.94% year-over-year to $1.17 billion in 2015. 
Elsewhere, the increases were even more dramatic, doubling in Wyoming and tripling in Alaska. Nationally, provisioning was up 21.56% year-over-year. But the total provisioning for the year was still a mere fraction of what banks set aside at the height of the credit crisis in 2009. Although depressed oil prices were a theme throughout 2015, U.S. production only started declining in the 2016 first quarter. Banks have reported increases in classified loans, but charge-offs remain very low.
"It feels like we're in the very early innings of a baseball game that's not a very fun one," said Chris Marinac, director of research for FIG Partners.
While it may be early innings, metro areas dependent on oil and gas are already feeling some pain. Few cities are as exposed as Casper, Wyo. In the 2015 third quarter — the most recent industry-specific data available — the metropolitan statistical area's employment base was 26 times more concentrated in drilling oil and gas wells than the national average. The oil and gas sector is already shedding jobs in the region: drilling jobs were down 50.9% (http://www.bls.gov/cew/apps/table_maker/v4/table_maker.htm#type=17&from=2014&to=2015&qtr=1&own=5&ind=213111&area=C1622&supp=1) and oil and gas support jobs were down 33.9% (http://www.bls.gov/cew/apps/table_maker/v4/table_maker.htm#type=17&from=2014&to=2015&qtr=1&own=5&ind=213112&area=C1622&supp=1) year-over-year in September.
MIDLAND FINANCIAL CORP'S unit, HILLTOP NATIONAL BANK, holds the plurality of Casper's deposits. Five of the bank's six branches are in the MSA. Despite being Casper's main bank, President and CEO Greg Dixson said the bank has zero energy exposure. 
All the same, some credit softness has cropped up in Hilltop National's loan portfolio. The amount of commercial and industrial loans past due by at least 30 days doubled in the fourth quarter from the linked quarter, although the increase was offset by a decline in past due real estate loans.
"We're having to spend more time on the phone, visiting people and prompting them to pay," Dixson said. "Our efforts in collections are more than they were in the past."
He said retailers in the area are starting to feel pressure and commercial real estate rents have started to decline. However, he said the residential real estate continues to show strength.
During the 2015 fourth quarter, Dixson said the bank made a one-time provisioning expense of $250,000 in response to the weak macroeconomic outlook. In addition to regular provisioning, the expense brought the $904.1 million bank's provisioning total to $360,000 in 2015, up from $60,000 in 2014.
Ultimately, provisioning in the face of a downturn involves some guesswork, FIG Partners' Marinac said. While banks can model for the severity of loss from a defaulted loan, he said banks have little idea knowing how many loans will go bad.
"Because you can't know the frequency, they're still stabbing at it," he said.
Dixson said he is not concerned about the increase in 30-day delinquencies since past dues are still historically low at less than 1% of gross loans, and the bank has maintained highly liquid balance sheet, with a loan-to-deposit ratio of 30.8% in the 2015 fourth quarter. The low ratio is largely the result of a large spike in deposits at the bank over the last five years without a corresponding increase in loans.
"Providing a return to our shareholders is important, but we want to be around for the next year and year after that," Dixson said.
He said the bank's focus in managing the energy downturn will be to proactively work with borrowers to figure out payment plans. And the cycle could provide an opportunity for new accounts, as larger banks shed exposure to the region regardless of an individual borrower's track record.
Large banks have also ramped up provisioning in response to the oil crash, most notably the nation's largest bank, JPMORGAN. The giant doubled (35719710 ) its provisioning expense in the 2015 fourth quarter from the linked quarter, and management said at an investor day that they plan to provision an additional $500 million in the first quarter. 
Banks appear eager to increase reserves for energy loan losses beyond the current rate of loan deterioration. For example, HANCOCK HOLDINGS reported relatively flat number of classified loans from the energy sector, yet the company increased its allowance for energy loan losses by $43 million. Sam Kendricks, chief credit risk officer for the company, said during the company's earnings call that a certain amount of loans did move into the classified category, but the increase was offset by resolutions.
That sort of provisioning prudence and the greatly increased levels of capital since the credit crisis have some analysts believing banks are well-prepared to weather the energy downturn. Marinac said he does not expect to see a significant number of bank failures because banks have sufficient capital buffers.
Todd Baker, managing principal for Broadmoor Consulting, also said he does not expect many failures. He said the larger banks have plenty of capital and have improved risk management practices generally. Further, many investors will be eager to recapitalize banks in order to get some energy exposure.
"There is a lot of capital interested in buying into energy at the bottom," Baker said. "It will be a rough patch for energy-exposed banks, but none of what's happening now, in my estimation, will affect the viability of any of these banks."
Just as banks might have learned some lessons from the 2008 credit crisis about sufficient capital buffers, so too have the oil-exposed economies learned about managing energy cycles. Economies in Texas, in particular, have diversified away from energy after the 1980s oil crisis triggered hundreds of bank failures.
And Hilltop National's Dixson said the Casper community will be able to handle whatever $30 oil offers.
"Wyoming is so accustomed to energy-related boom and bust," Dixson said. "Oil is going to come back, and natural gas will probably come back even sooner. For people around here —especially those who have been around here for a long time — this is just another cycle."
